# iv4xr-core <a name="top"></a>

* [The build instructions are below](README.md#buildinstr)
* [Agent programming manuals and tutorials](./docs/agentprogramming.md)
* [Agent-based testing manuals and tutorials](./docs/agentbasedtesting.md)
* [Code snippets](README.md#snippets)
* [Papers](README.md#papers)
* **Video:** [10m demo of iv4xr](https://youtu.be/Hc8NP4NuHAk).
* [APIs documentation](https://iv4xr-project.github.io/apidocs/aplib/javadocs/index.html)

Despite the packaging name 'aplib' this project should be called *iv4XR-core*, of which _aplib_ is part of. Iv4xr-core is a Java Library providing intelligent agents for automated testing. The primary use case is for testing highly interactive systems such as computer games though the library is generic enough to also be able to handle other types of systems. Within this Core, the aplib part forms its original agent programming inner-core.

**Iv4xr-core** forms the core of a bigger framework with the same name: [**iv4xr Framework**](https://github.com/iv4xr-project/iv4xr-framework). The latter integrates other approaches such as model-based testing (MBT), automated scriptless testing (through TESTAR), and player/user experience testing along side the Core.

The simplest setup to use iv4xr-core is:

  1. Create a Java method m() where you create one agent a.
  1. An agent is typically used to control some environment (e.g. a game). Attach an interface that would connect the agent a to the environment.
  1. formulate a goal for the agent a (e.g. to win the game), and program a tactic to accomplish/solve the goal.
  1. run the method m().

When the agent is used for testing, then we need an agent that is also a test agent; this would have some extra functionalities such as collecting test verdicts. For concrete examples see the tutorials povided [here (general about agent)](./docs/agentprogramming.md) and [here (for test-agent)](./docs/agentbasedtesting.md).

The inner-core **aplib** (shorthand of Agent Programming Library) is btw actually general purpose, and can be used to program agents for purposes other than testing.
On top of aplib, the Core adds testing-related functionalities and few other extra functionalities like a common world representation.
Using iv4xr-core can be seen as a special case of using aplib, where you get some testing-specific extra capabilities, such as expressing test oracles.

**Features:**

* **Fluent interface** style of APIs.
* BDI-inspired agents: they have their own states (their belief) and goals. The latter allows them to be programmed in a goal-oriented way.
* Combinators for **high level goal and tactical programming**.
* **Multi agent**: programming multiple agents controlling the a shared environment and communicating through channels.
* **Prolog binding**: allowing agents to do prolog-based reasoning to help them solving goals.
* **Bounded LTL**: for expressing temporal properties that can be checked during testing, or on traces generated by the tests.
* **An LTL model checker**: can be used for solving goals, e.g. when the problem to solve can be converted to a model/program that can be targeted by the model checker.
* Data collection: agents can collect traces for post-mortem data analyses.


**Papers** <a name="papers"></a>

  * Concepts behind agent-based automated testing:
  [_Tactical Agents for Testing Computer Games_](https://emas2020.in.tu-clausthal.de/files/emas/papers-h/EMAS2020_paper_6.pdf)
I. S. W. B. Prasetya, Mehdi Dastani, Rui Prada, Tanja E. J. Vos, Frank Dignum, Fitsum Kifetew,
in Engineering Multi-Agent Systems workshop (EMAS), 2020.

  * The agents' execution loop is explained  in this draft: [I.S.W.B. Prasetya, _Aplib: Tactical Programming of Intelligent Agents_, draft. 2019.](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.04710)

  * Extended abstract: [_Aplib: An Agent Programming Library for Testing Games_](http://ifaamas.org/Proceedings/aamas2020/pdfs/p1972.pdf), I. S. W. B. Prasetya,  Mehdi Dastani, in the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), 2020.

**Manuals, Reference, and Tutorials**: see [above](README.md#top).

#### Some code snippets: <a name="snippets"></a>

* Specifying a goal. The goal below is solved when offered a value x == 10.

```java
goal("Magic number is guessed!").toSolve((Integer x) -> x == 10)
```

* Specifying a tactic. A tactic specifies a program/heuristic for solving a goal. It could look like this:

```java
FIRSTof(guessLowerbound.on_((Belief belief) -> ! belief.feelingVeryLucky() ,
        ANYof(speculate1,
              speculate2,
              ...)
```        

* Creating and configuring an agent in the _fluent interface_ style:

```java
new AutonomousBasicAgent()
    . attachState(new StateWithMessanger() .setEnvironment(new ConsoleEnvironment()))
    . setGoal(topgoal)
    . setSamplingInterval(1000)
```

* Launching an autonomous agent on a new thread:

```java
new Thread(() -> agent.loop()) . start()
```

## Building with Maven  <a name="buildinstr"></a>

You need Java-11 or higher.

You can run `mvn` (Maven) at the project root to do the things listed below. Maven will put artifacts it produces under the directory `./target` in the project root.

* To compile the project: `mvn compile`
* To run the project unit tests: `mvn test`
* To produce a jar of the project: `mvn package`. This will invoke `compile` and `test`, and then produce a jar containing the whole project. This is the jar you want to use if you want to include in your own project if you want to use `aplib`.
* To generate the javadoc APIs documentation: `mvn javadoc:javadoc`. The resulting documentations can be found in `./target/site/apicdocs`.
* To clean `./target`: `mvn clean`

#### Projects dir. structure

* `./src/main/java` : the root of `aplib` Java source code.
* `./src/test/java` : the root of Java source code of `aplib` unit tests.
* `./docs/manual` : contain some tutorials and documentations.
* `./libs` : external jars provided for convenience. You should not need these jars if you build using Maven. They are needed if you want to work on aplib itself and want to just link the jars immediately.

## License

Copyright (c) 2019, Utrecht University.

`Aplib` is an open source software. It can be used and distributed under the
[LGPL version 3 license](./lgpl-3.0.md).

#### Credits

Contributors:
* Wishnu Prasetya, Naraenda Prasetya, Saba Ansari, Samira Shirzadeh, Fitsum Kifetew.
